[Music]
Welcome back to Take Care with the
Rowing Therapist. I'm your host
Danielle. With me today is Professor
Thomas Seaff Freed. I'm honored to bring
you a conversation with Dr. Seaff Freed.
He's a professor of biology at Boston
College and a leading researcher who
challenges how we think about cancer.
For decades, he's been studying what
really drives cancer at the deepest
level of our cells. Instead of seeing
cancer only as a genetic disease, he
argues that cancer begins as a problem
of energy metabolism when our
mitochondria, the power plants of our
cells, stop working properly. This
perspective opens up a whole new way of
looking at both prevention and
treatment. Today we'll explore what this
means in plain everyday language and
what each of us can do to better care
for our bodies, our health, and our
future. Dr. Seafrey, thank you so much
for being here today.
>> Oh, thank you very much. It's a real
pleasure to be here.
>> Oh, thank you so much. So to get
started, for those of um that are
hearing about your work for the first
time, can you explain in everyday terms
what it means to say that cancer is a
metabolic disease rather than a genetic
disease?
>> Yeah. Well, um let's just first define
what what cancer is. Um cancer is cell
division out of control or what we call
disregulated
uh cell growth. um as opposed to
regulated cell growth. Our tissues in
our bodies, we turn over cells uh all
the time and the colon and different
organs. But the new cells that come to
replace the older dying cells are
regulated in their growth. In the in the
case of of cancer, it's it's a
disregulated growth. So the question uh
is what is responsible for disregulated
growth? Is it mutations in the nucleus
of the cell that we hear about all the
time that cancer is a genetic disease?
What does that mean? It means that there
are mutations. The nucleus contains
chromosomes.
The chromosomes contain genes. Uh the
genes contain DNA
and uh uh mutations in the DNA are
thought to elicit or be responsible for
disregulated cell growth. according to
the sematic mutation theory
which is the dominant theory uh
for cancer today
and is supported by the NIH website
national cancer institute says cancer is
a genetic disease caused by mutations in
the DNA of chromosomes leading to
disregulated cell growth. Um and as the
result of that we have a multi-billion
dollar pharmaceutical industry uh
supporting new therapies and approaches
based on cancer being a genetic disease
called the sematic mutation theory.
um the work that Otto Warberg did years
and years ago in the 1920s
uh a giant in the field of of biology
and biochemistry.
He said all cancers are uh start from a
defect in their ability to use oxygen
for energy and thereby are uh um to grow
they must use this ancient
fermentation energy which doesn't
require oxygen.
And uh he said that's because the
organel in the cytoplasm, the
mitochondrian
is defective or dysfunctional in some
way allowing the cell to fall back on
this um ancient pathway of fermentation.
Uh fermentation energy was what was in
our atmosphere two and a half billion
years ago before oxygen came into the
atmosphere.
So uh in looking at cancer as a
metabolic disease, we now realize that
all cancers have some level of defect in
their energy producing organel, the
mitochondrian
uh allowing these cells to uh get energy
from uh uh the abs or this called
fermentation energy without oxygen.
And um what we see is that every type of
cancer
uh all are different with respect to
their nuclear genetic abnormalities
but all are similar with re their
respect to the reliance on this
fermentation energy without oxygen. And
therefore the common defect in all known
cancers are a reliance on or let's put
it this way a replacement of oxidative
phosphorilation energy with oxygen uh
for with energy in the that can be done
in the absence of oxygen. So cancer
cells can grow in the absence of oxygen.
Normal cells die in the absence of
oxygen.
um cancers if the we use a poison called
cyanide. Uh people you know you talk
about cyanide. They drank the Kool-Aid
laced with cyanide and everybody died.
Cyanide poisons energy through uh the
use of oxygen. Oxidative energy cyanide
poisons that and kills you very quick.
Any organism or cell using
respiration oxygen will be killed by
cyanide.
Cancer cells can grow in presence of
cyanide. So they can grow without oxygen
or they can grow in cyanide. This is dra
dramatically different than the normal
cells and that reliance on this
fermentation energy allows these cells
to grow in a disregulated way. So cancer
now we now know is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease, a disorder of the
energy metabolism, the mitochondria
leading to disregulated cell growth, not
the mutations in the nucleus. So there's
been many experiments now showing some
cancer cells have no mutations. Uh we
now find these so-called driver
mutations in normal cells that don't
have disregulated cell growth. And the
nuclear mitochondrial transfer
experiments clearly prove that cancer
cannot be a genetic disease. So um that
that means we have a big conundrum here.
The federal government, the National
Cancer Institute say it's a genetic
disease, but the scientific evidence
says it's absolutely cannot be a genetic
disease. So, so we have this big
problem. Uh people people if you ask
people on the street what's oh yeah it's
a genetic disease. Why? Because they've
been saying that for the last 50 or 75
years and therefore it must be true.
It's not true. And the reason why we
have 7,000 we have the reason why we
have one 1,700
people dying from cancer every day in
the United States which is 70 people per
hour dying from cancer is because people
the the they they say it's a genetic
disease. And once you realize it's a
metabolic disease, you can target the
two fuels that drive the disregulated
cell growth and effectively manage the
tumor with minimal or no toxicity.
Uh and that's the big challenge that we
have. Uh and this is what so you either
uh look into the science and see that we
are correct or you simply ignore it and
you don't want to talk about it.
>> Yeah, thank you for sharing that. So
talking about mitochondria which you
describe as the power plants of our
cells that direct that energy. What
happens when they break down and why is
that important?
>> Well as I said when they break down it
has to be chronic not acute.
>> Okay
>> acute breakdown or shutdown is cyanide.
Cyanide shuts down mitochondria acutely.
>> Okay.
>> And that that kills, right? We we die.
>> Cells die. But it's the chronic it's the
chronic disruption of of the
mitochondria.
Mitochondrial chronic mitochondrial
dysfunction
allows the cell to transition slowly
over periods of time to increase this
ancient pathways of of energy called the
fermentation energy without oxygen. But
it has to it takes it takes time for
that to happen. Sometimes years for that
to transition over. Once that cell
enters into the fermentation metabolism,
it grows out of control. Why does it
grow out of control? Because the
mitochondrian
controls the differentiated quiescent
state of the cell. So that's the organel
that that controls the destiny and
existence of the cell. And when that
organel becomes corrupted over time
chronically it loses control and the
cell now the the regulatory control of
the cell is no longer there and the cell
falls back on ancient pathways that
existed before oxygen came into the
atmosphere. So every the the cells that
existed at that time grew out of
control. disregulated cell growth was
the uh characteristic of all cells at
that. There was no mitochondria.
Mitochondria didn't come until the
fusion of archobacteria to form
metazzone complicated multisellular
organisms. But before that, everything
grew out of control and was driven by a
fermentation metabolism only because
there was no oxygen in the atmosphere.
But those pathways exist in all cells of
our body today. They're just very minor.
They don't really are need are not
needed except for short bursts of of
interruption like a heart attack when we
can't breathe. Uh our bodies fill up
with lactic acid and suinic acid. These
are the waste products of fermentation
metabolism. And if we don't air back
into our lungs, we die. But if air comes
back into the lungs, uh we can breathe
again and we can survive. But for that
short period of time, you see a
tremendous increase in fermentation
waste products which are the lactic
acid, lactate and suinic acid or
suenate. And the ca listen to this. The
the nor the cancer cells in our tumors
are throwing out lactic acid and suinic
acid all the time, even in the presence
of oxygen.
meaning that these tumor cells are being
driven by this ancient pathway of
fermentation and they can't and they're
no longer regulated because the organel
that regulates them is corrupt.
>> Wow. So, are there warning signs for
people that their
mitochondria is being chronically
damaged? Like are there symptoms
associated when they should start paying
attention or caring about metabolic
health?
>> Yeah. So the question is how how how
what what what effective ways can we
what can we do to cause what's the best
way to cause chronic damage to oxidative
phosphorilation.
>> Okay, if people really want to get
cancer, uh you you'd have to go and say
I really want cancer. Okay, what do we
need to do to chronically disrupt your
um oxos? Well, uh don't don't exercise
at all. Never never do anything that
would require any level of strenuous. Ma
make sure you smoke a lot. Um uh make
sure you're under a lot of chronic
stress. Uh make sure you eat large
amounts of highly processed
carbohydrates.
Uh make sure you you get obese. Obesity
is now replacing smoking a as a um a
risk factor for cancer. Uh diabetes is
also helpful. Get type two diabetes.
That that will put you on a a faster
track. Make sure you're obese with type
two diabetes. Don't exercise. Uh make
sure you have no friends and you're
stressed out all the time and you don't
have good sleep at night and you eat
large amounts of crap food. So, so uh
this this will put you on the fast track
uh to get disregulated cell damaged
mitochondria and and leading to cancer.
And if you don't get cancer, you'll have
to be you'll have to be satisfied with
diabetes or dementia uh or one of these
other uh kinds of chronic diseases.
They're all they're all linked to what
we call chronic disease. All linked to
mitochondrial dysfunction in one way or
another.
>> Yeah, I'm I'm appreciating that you're
bringing that up because so many
including our mental health are tied to
the mitochondria. Um, and just
appreciate you sharing that and
wondering if you wouldn't mind sharing a
little bit more about, you know, how we
can protect our mitochondria and keep it
healthy. I know you're kind of alluding
to that and how you would get cancer,
right? Like not exercising. We can draw
those conclusions, but specifically like
your research, what has it taught you
about healthy living?
>> Well, if you keep your mitochondria
healthy, it's hard to get cancer.
doesn't mean it can ne never happen. It
just means that it's more difficult.
It's also uh hard to get uh type two
diabetes
uh coronary artery disease uh neuros
neuroscychiatric problems uh dementia uh
all of the all of these are in one way
or another linked to uh um mitochondrial
dysfunction. So we have to go back and
ask um uh what what our Paleolithic
ancestors did
our paleo 500,000 years ago. People say,
"Well, how do you know what happened
500,000 years ago when nobody's alive to
tell us?" But we have we have ancestral
tribes uh tribes of people living on the
planet who who uh follow these ancient
traditions of of their culture. And uh
uh the the studies of those people
showed cancer was extremely rare.
um they did not have the same kinds of
chronic diseases that we see in western
society. They mostly suffered from in uh
injuries and inflammation and
you know infections and this kind of
thing which is what killed our
paleolithic ancestors because they had
no antibiotics or orthopedic surgeons to
fix them. Uh but those guys who could
live uh uh uh survive childhood and live
they could live just as long as we we
could. It's just that it's just that
they would be dying from from old age
and things like this. But you keep your
mitochondria healthy by um again
exercise
uh good sleep um don't get too stressed
out
uh um fasting uh what we call water only
fasting or re or intermittent calorie
restriction enhance the uh uh if you if
you if you burn ketone bodies and fatty
acids you can keep your mitochondria
healthy. uh tumor cells can't burn fatty
acids or ketone bodies. That's why we
know how to kill them without toxicity.
Uh but but the idea is is if you keep
your mitochondria healthy. Now in
western society, we're bombarded by
microlastics, forever chemicals, lack of
exercise, emotional stress. All of these
things will damage the structure and
function of the mitochondria. So we have
to we have to know uh pretty much now we
don't have to live exactly as our
paleolithic ancestors you know we don't
have to go out and kill deer and cows
and and u and and eat the animals that
they did uh because we have meat
processed and things like this but the
it's the kinds of foods that we eat. Are
these organic foods uh um or are these
highly processed foods? Um, you know, we
used to just eat whatever we could find
growing on a bush or dig it out of the
ground or kill an animal. Now, our food
uh industry is is everything is at high
convenience for us. You have Door Dash
and you have everything. You don't even
have to go out and exercise to get the
food. It comes right to you. Um, who
knows how healthy this stuff is. They
say it is, but it's not. May not be. So,
we don't know. But all I all I know is
that is that if you keep your
mitochondria healthy and burn ketones,
ketones are a super fuel for
mitochondria. It really enhances their
health and that but you our bodies
generally don't burn ketones. That's why
we developed the glucose ketone index
calculator uh which is the keto GKI the
glucose ketone index. If you if you can
keep your GKI levels low, like below 10,
um you can probably prevent the majority
of K. I would say below 20. Most members
of our society are are 50 to 500, um
which puts tremendous stress on the
mitochondria. So this is why we're we're
developing a new tool called the the
GKI, the glucose ketone index. Uh and
you can see what exercise does, what
water only fasting does. you can see
what lowering stress uh you can you can
actually watch your GKI change in in in
in in the direction depending on what
you plan to do to your body. So if you
go out to eat and drink a gallon of
sweet tea or Coca-Cola and pound down a
big pizza, you you watch your GKI
skyrocket. Um, it's okay to do that
periodically, but to live in that zone,
uh, you're you're definitely on on the
fast track for cancer, dementia, type
two, diabet, obesity. You can list put
the whole list of them right there all
together. Uh, they all feed into from
they're all originating from one thing
that's called mitochondrial dysfunction.
Keep your mitochondria healthy and you
could probably reduce significantly the
the risk of all of these other uh
chronic diseases.
Wow. Yeah. I'm I'm interested in wanting
to know more and have you tell us how do
you how do you measure your GKI? I I
know how to test for ketones, but what's
this new GKI? Tell us.
>> Well, the GKI is the ratio of glucose to
ketones in the bloodstream.
>> Ah, okay.
>> Okay. So, right now they have uh uh
monitors finger prick. people I know
they don't like to do it uh because in
the field I worked in the field of
epilepsy for for for years years and we
know we can manage epileptic seizures in
children with ketogenic diets but you
have to uh measure the ratio of blood
sugar to ketones and and you do that
with the uh this this ratio of glucose
to ketones you like to keep your blood
sugar low and your ketones elevated um
but but it's a finger prick meth method
right now we we have continuous glucose
monitor
You see a lot of people with diabetes
wearing these.
>> Um they don't give you the ketones and
we don't we don't have that. The
continuous glucose ketone monitor will
be uh the Chinese have one made but we
don't get them in the United States.
But this will be the future of managing
chronic diseases. Easy. We can do it now
with the fingerprint method with the
keto mojo.
>> Okay.
>> Uh buy but you can buy it on Amazon.
It's a blood glucose ketone meter.
>> Okay. And it will it will uh yeah, I
think the meter is pretty cheap. It's
like $50 or something. And and the and
the consumable strips, the glucose
strips and the ketone strips uh are are
what you have to constantly replace. Um
but anyone can do this anytime. Urine
strips, you know, people say, "Oh, you
pee on a strip and it tells you a
color-coded range of what your ketones
are." But this is indirect. The most
accurate way is to fingerprint blood. uh
you take a like a diabetic would do.
They always they're monitoring their
blood glucose with a with a strip. Well,
we do that now with the glucose strips
and the ketone strips. And then the
meter is designed that has our uh our
our calculator in the meter. We couldn't
patent this. The patent they don't
patent formula. So we we never made a
nickel on this whole thing. But yet it
will be the tool to completely manage
chronic diseases in the world population
by just keeping your GKI levels in in
ranges that enhance the health and
vitality of your mitochondria. So we now
have a quantitative tool to know whether
you're not whether or not you're abusing
your mitochondria.
>> Beautiful.
>> Yeah. So, and so if you were doing those
blood tests alone together, so if you
had a glucose monitor, let's say, and a
keto monitor, what ranges should people
be aiming for?
>> Well, that that's kind of variable. It
depends on the individual. Um,
>> okay.
>> And uh, you know, some people can eat
certain things, others can't. Everybody
is their unique experiment themselves.
So, they would they would have to
measure their values and see where they
fall on the chart.
and then determine what they need to do
to move the value in the direction of of
health, mitochondrial health. Um, you
know, most of us know I I mean, we've
seen it where you don't eat just do
water only fasting for several days. Uh,
you see your GKI come down or a
carnivore diet or something like this.
Uh, you can see over a period of several
days the numbers start coming down and
down. uh there there's a a zone of what
we call prevention. you you you keep
your your zone I would say below below
20 uh between 10 and 20 or in that zone
a lot of exercise a lot of uh you know
foods that that have very low
carbohydrate sugar contents and
Mediterranean diets and these kinds of
things they all keep your GKI pretty low
and you do exercise you know walk
several miles ride a bike lift weights
or whatever and you stay you see your
GKI staying in these zones um that's a
prevention zone if you have chronic
disease like cancer or or diabetes or
these kinds of things. Uh for cancer we
said 2.0 or below. So you're really uh
this will blow this brutalizes these
tumor cells. they they have great deal
of difficulty surviving in these low GKI
zones and they need the glucose and they
need the the amino acid glutamine. Uh
which glutam glucose can be managed with
diet but glutamine gluc the sugar
glucose can be managed with diet but the
amino acid glutamine the second fuel
driving the disregulated growth uh
requires drugs. So we we we keep people
in low GKI and then come in with
glutamine targeting drugs to kind of
destroy these tumor cells and you can do
it without toxicity if you can stay in
these in these metabolic zones and the
results are quite spectacular for a lot
of people. Um but again it's hard for
some people to do this. Um I'm not
saying this is a cakewalk. I mean you
have your choice. You can either do
metabolic therapy uh with some
combination of toxic radiation and chemo
or you can do toxic radiation and chemo
and then if you do survive you might
have to pay the rest of your life
dealing with the adverse effects of
those poisonous and horrific tri types
of treatments. But we're we're we're
realizing now that people are managing
cancer and chronic diseases keeping a
low GKI and uh getting it lower uh will
start managing when we say can we got to
kill cancer cells and they can't survive
when the blood sugar gets really low. uh
our brain sucks it up and then you go
out and walk around and your muscles
suck up the sugar and the poor cancer
cells get marginalized and up and die
and then you come in with a a glutamine
targeting drug for a short period of
time and you can just destroy with a
large amount of these cancer cells but
you have to do it strategically over
months. Um it doesn't happen overnight
but you're not harmed doesn't harm you.
The rest of the body the rest of your
cells get super healthy as you'reing the
tumor. So you actually emerge from the
treatment much healthier than when you
started.
>> Nice.
>> So we're starting to see that. That's a
really nice way to do it.
>> Yeah. Great. And in your research, any
powerful stories you can share of people
really changing their outcomes through
these approaches?
>> Yeah. Well, we we've seen it uh with u
you know, Pablo Kelly uh who came to me
in 2014 with a glyobblasto
and we were young. we were new. Let's we
weren't young but we were just learning
about this whole thing and he didn't
want radiation, chemo or even surgery.
Um he was a young man. Uh he he led a
hard life as he said a lot of a lot of
drugs and alcohol. Uh but he got a
glyopblastoma and then went cold turkey
and uh it got his GKI down real real low
and uh the tumor uh that was considered
inoperable uh after two years became
operable. So he living living two years
with a glyopblasto is a is a challenge
challenge in itself. uh because this is
the kind of tumor that killed John
McCain and Ted Kennedy and and uh
President former President Biden's son.
The these are the very bad
glyopblastoomas and Pablo was doing
really well. Um and then after a couple
of years he had his tumor cut out the
bulk they call it and he he thought he
was cured but then it started to come
back again and then he went back on the
metabolic therapy and he had that tumor
cut out two other times. So, he had it
three surgical debulkings over a 10-year
period
um for a tumor that was originally
considered inoperable. And if and and if
he didn't take chemo and radiation, they
said he would be dead in a year. He died
10 years. Uh but it but it was from a
complication of the last bulking surgery
where he had a cerebral
and died from that. So, he never died.
He died from a a complication of the
third surgery of a debulking tumor. And
we were laughing about this a week
before he passed away. Um he came out of
the operation, flying colors, thumbs up,
and that night he had a a hemorrhage and
died. But but the but the idea that
here's a guy with a terminal deadly
brain tumor and he lives 10 years and if
he didn't have that last bulking
surgery, he would still be alive today.
So, and we've we're pulling pancreatic
cancer patients. Uh we're giving them a
greater extension of life as well. We're
we're we're really seeing prostate
cancer, breast cancer. We're having
great success with breast cancer. Um
we're trying to publish these papers
uh in in in in peer-reviewed scientific
journals where I publish. I'm not just,
you know, pulling this out of my butt.
The the these these the evidence for
this is already in scientific
peer-reviewed publications on the web.
So people can read the read the story
about Pablo and what he did and how his
GKI matched his survival. So um you know
we had a woman from Ohio who uh had uh
uh breast cancer that metastasized to
the brain and liver and bones and she
was given one month to survive and then
went to our colleagues clinic in
Istanbul Turkey where they do a
combination of of um of metab
metabolically supported chemo lowd dose
chemo with metabolic support and she's
doing really really well. Um she's
perfectly no evidence of disease now
after six years. She's doing great when
she was supposed to have one.
>> Wow.
>> Published that. We published that as
well. Uh prostate cancer. We're seeing
tremendous success with prost all the
cancers. They're the same. They're not
all different from each other. They all
are are dependent on the sugar glucose
and the amino acid glutamine. And they
can't burn fatty acids or ketones. So So
the whole concept of cancer being
difficult disease is nonsense. If you if
you know that it's a metabolic disease,
then you know how to manage it. But if
you think it's a genetic disease, then
you're treated with toxic poisons and
mutilations and all this kind of stuff.
So, and this is the great tragedy. We
have we have 1,700 people a day dying
from cancer in the United States. And
about 50% of these people are dying from
the toxic treatments they receive. This
is nuts. This is crazy.
>> Crazy.
>> It's a tragedy. It's a tragedy of
monumental proportions. And yet the top
medical schools uh keep saying that it's
a genetic disease and they got to use
these toxic chemical this PD PDL1
inhibitors, CARTT imunotherapy, truck
checkpoint inhibitors and all this kind
of nonsense. You know they those things
could work uh in together with metabolic
therapy, but they would not be the they
would be secondary tools. They wouldn't
be the primary tool. The primary tool is
get the glucose down and the ketones up
and bring and bring your body into a
state of metabolic homeostasis. And then
you could come in with some of these
other things with very low doses. Uh so
reduced significantly. We're not
throwing out all the stuff for standard
of care. We're just rearranging supposed
to be used. We're using it in the wrong
way.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, it's just not. And people are
suffering. People are suffering
immensely as the result of this.
>> Absolutely. What do you think it is that
keeps the medical community so clinging
tightly to this genetic theory?
>> Revenue generation. So that's simple.
Everybody knows that.
>> I mean, it's not surprising cancer
patients are serving a valuable role in
our economy. They're maintaining the a
tremendous industry. So the industry is
more interested in self-preservation
than than in patient outcome. That's
clear. Other it's immoral. It's actually
a moral industry basically. Um but you
know uh you know you generate a lot of
tax revenue from these companies and
things like this. So, so but it's but
it's not in the best interest of the
patient, but in the best interest of the
industry. And everybody knows that. Um,
and they just they just go like sheep uh
to these top clinics and they think they
know what they're talking. Most of these
guys in the clinics have no clue. Um,
they're giving their cancer patients uh
uh ice cream and cake and Coca-Cola and
candy because they say glucose has
nothing to do with. What are these
people nuts? Don't they read the
scientific li they understand the
biology and biochemistry and then they
wonder why we have all these dead cancer
patients? I mean I don't understand it
myself. I mean once you understand what
the cancer is and and you say why are we
doing what we're doing? Makes no sense.
Yet the people don't they oh they get so
frightened and I know that as soon as
they hear that they have cancer they
think the angel of death is looking over
their shoulder and that's not
necessarily the case. We're seeing
tremendous management uh uh and and
recovery uh it's hard to recover when
your body is poisoned and radiated um
surgically mutilated
you know I mean even normal people
subjected to this could die just from
that much less a cancer
>> you know and they also have a lot of
coorbidities like diabetes obesity
uh cardiovascular problems and all of
these compound compounded make make
recovery difficult We we can ma uh with
metabolic therapy we manage not only the
cancer but we manage a lot of the
comorbidities associated with it. The
problem is the people at the top medical
schools are unfamiliar with this. The
medical schools are not training
>> they're not training the physicians to
know about this. Uh and therefore the
physicians come out they spend years you
know studying how chemo or radiation can
be used without killing the patient. But
they're not knowing that with the
biology or biochemistry of the disease.
And when they do when they are told,
they say it's a genetic disease. Nothing
we can do. We have to radiate and poison
people. This is the crazy stuff that's
happening. So um once they once they
become educated and know the biology and
biochemistry, they're going to scratch
their head and say, "What did I do to
these poor people? How could anybody
ever like you got to start thinking?"
>> Yeah.
>> You know,
and we don't have too many thinkers.
just
>> you are absolutely hitting at one of the
really important pieces of this I think
and that's the mindset around it. We
have this medical industry that's taught
to be the expert that they know
everything that they're really
memorizing what they are presented with
to learn. And so there's not room for
open mindfulness, right, of being
curious of of noticing things of
treating patients like they know their
bodies and they're connected to their
bodies. And I think you even mentioned
before, you know, that idea of of if we
I heard someone once say to me, "You
can't beat genetics." When we were
talking about health, she says, "This is
what my doctor told me. You can't beat
genetics." And I just could appreciate
for that moment like how much that
shapes her lens of what's available to
her, what she can do about it. We just
literally accept things and and and I
really do think there's a connection in
that, right? What we're thinking is
possible. Like even saying, "Oh, I could
never do a keto diet. It's too hard is a
belief that we can subscribe to. We're
not." Like you said, you could do that
or you could do the hard way. Yeah. Go
ahead. No, but it's that that's another
misconception. They've made, oh, this
keto stuff. It's like we we get great
results with calorierestricted
Mediterranean diets. Uh what I mean,
people can't eat sardines and salmon or
avocados or olive oil. I mean, this they
can't eat that. They can't eat a prime
rib. They can't they can't eat a a
ribeye. Tomahawk ribe eyes. What's wrong
with a tomahawk ribeye?
>> I can't I'm with you. the only people
and the ve the vegans, they may have a
little bit more challenge. Um, it's
harder for the vegans to get into low
GKI than it is for the carnivores. Uh,
but every every person can get into that
zone. Uh, they monitor what they eat and
how much they eat and and they don't try
they eat the regular stuff. Oh, uh, you
know, I'm not saying go out and eat, you
know, bag of pretzels and potato chips.
That's going to be tough to get into a
low GKI that stuff. Uh, but who does
that? I mean, who would want to do that
to manage your cancer? Eat potato chips
and pretzels. Nobody does that. Maybe
there are some people, but I don't know
many. I mean, but we already we already
we already uh put the u the pathway to
get to into low GKI. And if a person can
do that with a a pescatarian,
Mediterranean, whatever it is, and the
term is nutritional ketosis,
uh uh the people who fear what we say
want to make it like, oh, ketogenic
diets are so bad. Are you kidding me?
Our ancestors were all in nutritional
ketosis. We evolved in nutritional
ketosis. It's my it's my belief that
once you don't understand evolutionary
biology, you remain profoundly ignorant
uh of how the biology how the body
works. Um and believe me, there's very
few people that really understand
evolutionary biology. And this will be
the this will crack the code for cancer.
Understanding evolutionary biology will
crack the cancer. We'll be able to
manage it. Um because we're going back
to the way our bodies were designed in
the first place. You know, we are a
supreme uh effective machine. We evolved
in starved environments. We as a species
could go long distances without eating
uh and have tremendous energy. Our
bodies are an incredible machine. You
know, the obesity epidemic is evolution
in action. If people say, "I don't
understand biological evolution." I
said, "Do you understand the obesity
epidemic?" Everybody can see that those
folks that are obese are the are the
survivors of of our ancestors that
survived incredible uh periods of of uh
of uh starvation or lack of energy. Our
bodies are supremely designed to store
energy. That's how we we evolve. Now
when we have an environment loaded with
highly processed carbs, our bodies are
styles of storing all this energy in the
event of a of a of a famine or something
and we have an ob there's no famine. We
just get more and more carbs and we get
fatter and fatter and we get more and
more unhealthy. Cancer, dementia,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
neuroscychiatric problems, they're all
related to the same thing. They're all
related to mitochondrial dysfunction.
So, um, and cancer is the big dog in the
whole group. So, uh, but it's all it's
all linked. It's all linked. And if you
don't understand evolutionary biology,
uh, you're going to be one of those
statistics in the end.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And you're mentioning us
evolving from a ketogenic diet
perspective, right? Of starvation, of
having our bodies producing.
>> It wasn't It wasn't a ketogenic diet. It
was just foods that had very little
carbohydrates in.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Thank you for that distinction.
>> We we we didn't have delicateessins on
every corner in the Paleolithic period.
>> Where would you where would you get uh
carbohydrates from a ripe fruit during
seasonal periods? and and people would I
mean we we are obsessive compulsive
behavior people too. We would eat as
much uh ripe fruits and get drunk just
like the animals. Uh where there would
be some fermentation in there and our I
mean we would be just you know but it
was seasonal. It wasn't lasting long.
>> Uh then we're back.
>> Yeah. That's why we developed festivals
during certain periods of the time so we
could all enjoy ourselves periodically.
But now the festival is 247 the
festival.
>> Yes. Yes. Absolutely. Absolutely. So,
and you know, and the point I was
getting at is that, you know, sometimes
people feel like they have to cycle
their carbohydrate use and that there's
some kind of a risk associated with
eating um to have their, you know, their
ketos levels higher throughout. Is there
any risk involved in someone who wants
to maintain nutritional ketosis for a
long term?
Um well, as as I said, our ancestors uh
were mostly in nutritional ketosis all
the time because there wasn't a way to
get out of it.
>> Um except during seasonal periods where
where fruits or vegetables would be on
the riper side uh where they might have
a little bit more carbs uh for sure, but
uh that's our natural state is
nutritional ketosis. And that's why the
GKI values, we're trying to bring the
the modern man back into the Paleolithic
man. But uh bi biologically, but but
knowing that we we now have a lot of
choices uh to keep ourselves in the tr
our ancestors
were there. They had no choice. This
this was their state of existence. Um,
it took a lot of energy to run down and
kill a buffalo or or elk or whatever
else you're going to do. You spend all I
say hunter gatherers. Okay. How how many
you got to gather all day long. You're
using a lot of exercise to do all this
stuff and you're eating foods that are
very low in in carbohydrate content. No
highly processed carbs. Everything was
all natural. And you were in a state of
nutritional ketosis most of the time.
Now, of course, if they had access to
highly processed carbs, uh, they would
gobble it up. Uh, and that's what we're
doing today. We gobble it up and we get
fat, we get demented, then we get
cancer, we get diabetes, and we get
cardiovascular disease because because
all that stuff is in our environment
constantly,
>> it's engineered to be highly palatable
and
>> keeps you coming back for more and more.
>> Oh, unbelievable. You just can't eat
one, you know. You can. Nor could our in
an ancestor. I mean, if we had these
guys and we could bring them back from
500,000 years ago and give them a big
box of potato chip bag of potato chips
and and donuts and cake. Oh, they'd be
killing themselves for this stuff. They
just never had it.
>> Yes. Absolutely. Yeah. It's engineered
to be that way. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> But once you know Yeah. Once you know
that at least at least we none of us the
problem now is a society doesn't have
the knowledge that I'm talking about. So
we are in charge of our own destiny and
once our keto GKI values get out and
published and people know where they
stand on a daily basis uh then it will
be up to personal choice. I'm not
against getting rid of highly processed
carbs. I mean I like them too. I like a
pretzel and a beer. Who doesn't? you
know, uh, but you to live on it, it
would be hazardous to your health.
>> Yeah. So, so you advocate generally
speaking living a pretty healthy
lifestyle, allowing yourself these
treats, occasionally not as the norm,
just as you said, our paleo ancestors
would have these festivals and times of
the year that they would engage in these
different things. But something else
that comes to mind when you mention the
paleo um era is, you know, this idea of
living in such a comfortable society,
right, where our rooms are climate
controlled and everything's available at
the touch of a button. Just wondering
about as far as mitochondria health, you
know, how much things like sauna use or
cold exposure, do those things help with
mitochondrial health? Well, I think they
probably do. Um, you know, uh, exercise,
I think, is probably one of the most
important things.
>> Okay.
>> Uh, think about how hard it would be.
Even even prairie, our even our, um,
colonial ancestors lived a tough life.
Um, cancer was not a big disorder in in
in uh, the 17 and 1800s. Uh, because
most people were eating organic foods
for the most part, had a lot of
exercise. Um so none of these things
cancer seemed to explode big time um
after the second world war uh where it
really became bigger and bigger and in
fact the English have done some nice
studies uh during the industrial
revolution uh what was killing most of
the people were uh was consumption TB
tuberculosis infections and things like
that but then in the 1990s
um uh it started to be cancer
uh and these kinds of things. So clearly
cancer is a disease of uh advanced
technology uh our technological advances
as I said um our technology has evolved
far more far faster than our biology. We
we are still paleolithic man
evolutionarily but we're but our
technology has put us now in a new
environment uh that impacts negatively h
on our health and then we built a giant
industry around uh taking care of these
health issues uh you know we have
stances for the heart we have these
drugs that will allow blood flow uh you
know we we we have uh uh gly glucag
we're We're using band-aids
uh to manage chronic diseases which are
all preventable.
>> So uh and and the and the health
industry is making billions and billions
of dollars on band-aids for chronic
diseases when it's all preventable.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. What
are your thoughts on the GLP1
inhibitors? Well, I I I haven't tested
them enough uh to know um you know, and
I don't know what the long-term
consequences will be. I know there's
some adverse effects, but I don't know
how how bad they are. They call it face,
and I know there's some muscle loss and
maybe some eye uh retinal retinal
problems.
um you know and I know how hard it is
for people to want to lose weight
>> uh and exercise and and and uh once you
start going on these yo-yo dieting and
all that you you trigger what we call
the thrifty gene where the body always
feels now it must supererstore energy
because you have threatened it several
times and in the Paleolithic period we
were always in that condition so we
always had to store as much energy as
possible so um yeah people want the easy
way out all the time I'm not you know
It's just more convenient to drive up to
uh uh to get a Big Mac from McDonald's
and get it through the window than it is
to park your car, unash the car, and
walk in and get it.
>> Uh it's much easier to take those epic
than do the do what you have to do.
>> Yeah. No, you were talking about these
band-aids, right? And and that was what
came to mind for me is that this big
trend right now of people injecting
themselves with this to get quick
results and
Is that who we are? It's who we are.
Human nature.
>> Absolutely. So, if if someone listening
to us today is dealing with cancer um or
their loved one and what advice would
you give them?
>> You know, I'm not a physician, so I
really can't give them any medical
advice about anything.
>> Absolutely. Yeah.
>> So, I only have to share knowledge and
share evidence and then people can come
to their own uh discussion. The pro the
problem that I see is that, you know, we
publish all these papers, we discuss all
these concepts, the guy on the street
hears it and gets all excited and then
when they have cancer or something, they
run down to their top cancer center and
they say, "Oh, you know, everything that
I say is not true. There's no evidence
to support what we're saying. Do what we
do what we do." And the poor patient is
left in limbo. I don't know uh
>> you know how and they say well if cancer
drive is if if sugar drives cancer why
are you giving me candy and donuts in
the in the waiting room you know it
doesn't make any sense oh no cancer
doesn't have sugar this tells you the
lack of knowledge on the very people
that are supposed to be there to help
you and it's very glaring if you have a
physician this eats eat donuts and candy
uh get rid of that guy get somebody who
knows what he's got what he's doing and
we're trying to train people we're
starting a new society of of metabolic
oncology that's going to try to train
physicians to help cancer patients in
the true way uh to manage their disease
without too much toxicity or or or uh
disruption of their of their health
because you know I feel bad because we
do have millions of cancer survivors uh
who have tra t taken traditional
medicine uh but they but they're often
very damaged in some way or another um
they have a lot of adverse effects from
the treatments they have bone issues
neuroscychiatric problems s, digestive
problems, hormonal imbalances, weak
bones. They have a lot of different
>> things that put their quality of life
um at a lower level for those who never
had to deal with that in the first
place. So, um I think if people know
what to do and how to do it, uh which is
based on the hard science,
>> not on on crazy stuff that people read
about um that that you can you're you're
in charge of your own destiny. And if
you know what to do and how to do it,
then you put yourself at a lower risk
for these chronic diseases.
>> Yes. I believe that movie First Do No
Harm kind of showcases that, right? I
don't I don't know if you're familiar
with that or if you've seen it.
>> Yeah. Oh, yeah. I know. I I know the
people in there.
>> Um Okay.
>> It was based on on my my uh my late
friend John Freeman. He was a leader in
the field of ketogenic diet met for
epileptic seizures. And uh Jim Abrams,
who's recently passed away, was the
movie producer. He produced the airplane
movies. His his his son Charlie uh
almost died uh from chronic epilepsy and
um uh they started the Charlie
Foundation based on Charlie's experience
using keto metabolic therapy, basically
ketogenic diets to manage epileptic
seizures. And Mel Street, the famous
movie actress, uh portrayed the mother
in the story. uh but it was all based on
John's Hopkins which was the leading
institution for using uh keto metabolic
therapy for managing seizures and uh
what what I worked in that area for many
many years and that's we transitioned
over to the cancer because we can
effectively manage cancer uh using
similar strategies but we have to bring
in drugs to target the glutamine which
is not an issue for epileptic patients.
So, so we just modified a a strategy uh
uh uh and and those kids, you know, I I
saw them they would have breakthrough
seizures even if blood sugar went up
just a little bit.
>> See, with cancer with cancer, you can
drink a Coca-Cola and you you can't all
of a sudden see your tumor grow fast.
It's not like an ep a breakthrough
seizure where you see it immediately in
the child. U but the tumor will grow
when you drink Coca-Cola. There's no
question about it. The problem is you
can't see it as as as as uh as read
readily as you can see an epileptic
seizure. So um so we we we use similar
it's metabolism basically energy
metabolism how to wield the power of our
own bodies and and know how to manage
things that that are at a at a kilter.
So we want to bring bodies back into
metabolic homeostasis and that's what we
try to do uh to manage these chronic
diseases.
>> Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So you knew them
personally. I was just I thinking about
that movie because of the way Maril Stre
is treated when she wants to try some
alternative with the doctor. She's
almost like shamed by them and
>> well it's still today. It goes
absolutely exactly the same in the
cancer clinics. Yeah. Almost exactly the
same.
>> Which is hard because you're feeling
vulnerable already and the last thing
you want is a doctor who's challenging
what you're saying. So, but it sounds
like a good protocol is to know your
research, read, learn about it, advocate
for it, and and you can actually shop
around and find a doctor who's more in
line with that is kind of what I'm
hearing you say.
>> Yeah. But you got to be careful, too.
You have to be careful because these
some of these guys, they they talk the
talk, but they don't understand the
science of biology,
>> um, the biochemistry. So, they start
throwing all these uh supplements at you
and say, "Oh, this is supposed to help
and that's supposed to help." There's no
I don't talk about anything unless I've
tested it in my pre-clinical systems in
my lab here at Boston College. So,
people ask me about this or that. I
don't know until I test it.
>> I don't know until I see peer-reviewed
replicated science supporting it like
the parasite medications.
uh we discovered that the cancer cells
uh use a very interesting kind of energy
metabolism inside their broken
mitochondria. It's actually a
fermentation mechanism. And um turns out
when I saw parasites using the same
thing, I said, "Wow, these parasite
medications may work really well against
cancer." And they do. Uh because the
cancer cell and the parasite use a
common metabolic pathway. So now explain
people knew some of these parasite
medications worked. They didn't know the
mechanism. So, we know the mechanism
why it works and how it works. We know
we can treat cancer with parasite. As
long as the patient is in nutritional
ketosis, this all works so much better.
You have to do both. You you have to
know how to target both the glue glucose
and the glutamine pathways while
transitioning over the whole body over
to fatty acids and ketones. And then you
can start managing all these diseases.
But you got to know the biochemistry. I
I don't expect the guy on the street to
understand as much as we do. Um because
this is all I live 24/7 doing these
experiments and looking at the
mechanisms all the time. They just need
to know uh what I need to do to exploit
what I know. And that's the thing that's
the thing the solution the a major
participant in the management of cancer
is the patient themselves. A lot of the
success rides on their shoulders. So
they don't have to feel like they're
sitting there like like just some object
and being radiated and poisoned and
mutilated. They they they have a lot of
the outcome depends on a lot of their uh
active participation and knowing what to
do and how to do it. And the doc a good
physician will tell the cancer patient
this is what you need to do to work with
the drugs and procedures that I'm giving
you to make this process a lot more uh
less stressful and a lot a lot a lot
more manageable with greater outcome.
Yes. Well, and to make your work a
little more accessible to the guy on the
street, right? You've also co-founded a
nonprofit, the foundation for metabolic
cancer therapies. Can you tell us about
its mission and the work it supports?
>> Yeah, that uh Travis Kristofferson's
foundation uh was developed after I
wrote my book uh uh cancer as a
Metabolic Disease. he just wanted to
make sure that that what we were doing
would be uh supported and and all of our
research here at Boston College comes
from uh philanthropy and private
foundations. Um I always find it strange
when people give multi-millions of
dollars to the top medical cancer
centers for drugs and procedures that
have made the problem worse. uh and when
you do metabolic therapy, you know, it's
the it's the goodwill of a few people
that realize that they can make a
difference by supporting our research.
Uh so Travis Kristopherson's foundation
has been absolutely instrumental. People
who want to support our research uh give
money to Travis. We have a standing uh
grant through his foundation to Boston
College and and uh I can continue to
test and and uh we work out dosage
timing and scheduling in pre-clinical
models of of animals that have uh
natural cancers, not these genetically
uh things that people uh work. Many
people use these genetic models that are
are are genetically created in abnormal
biology and everything and then they
they wonder why it doesn't work when
they try to go into the human clinic. We
use only natural all natural models and
it's just as hard to manage those
cancers in mice as it is in humans
because they're all natural. They not
these genetically engineered things. So
whenever we get success in our
pre-clinical models, we get even better
success when we when we uh uh translate
it to the clinic. I'm shocked. I I've
never cured cancer in a mouse. Uh
natural cancer. Uh but I see humans
doing so much better than the mice that
we work with. Uh people always cure
mice. Oh, that's We you use
natural cancer models, it's very hard to
cure them. Um, but we're getting great
success in keeping uh animals alive far
far longer. And when we use it
translated over into the clinic, we're
shocked. Most of my clinician friends
are just like blown away. How can these
people so look so healthy? They were
told terminal stage four cancer and they
look super healthy and they're not
dying. What's going on with that? What's
happening there? Because you're
targeting glucose and glutamine while
your body is in nutritional ketosis.
That's what's going on. So uh and using
different kinds of non-toxic drugs that
we're working on to try to figure the
molecular mechanism of action. So we're
working on it all and it eventually
press pulse metabolic therapy which we
developed here at Boston College will
eventually become the standard of care
uh for managing cancer throughout the
world uh based on GKI value glucose
ketone index uh knowing how to move the
patient from one stage to the next uh
dosage timing and schedule. It's a work
in progress. Um it's it's still at the
very beginning, but our our observations
are astonishing for some people, not all
people. You know, there's some people
who just simply cannot do it. And we're
trying to figure out ways to help these
folks uh get into these zones. Uh some
people are so far gone when they're when
they try to do it. Like if a person gets
cancer and they're treated, they're
radiated and poisoned and mutilated,
their bodies sometimes no longer have
the capacity to rally. We we we use we
use the normal uh healthy cells in the
body as a secondary attack on the tumor
cells. So uh when your normal cells are
healthy and strong uh they they and you
put body under nutritional state the
normal cells will attack the tumor and
use the use the fuel of the tumor to the
rest of the body that are craving fuel.
So it's called autoolytic cannibalism.
Our own body will attack tumor but once
you put
>> Yeah. But you got to know how to do
that. I It's a skill to know how to do
this. It's not Oh, yeah.
>> Let's all go out and do auto
cannibalism, right?
>> Yeah. You got Okay. Leon, you want to
start? Don't eat any food for 21 days.
Just drink a little water. Oh, no. I
don't want to order. I forget. You have
anything easier you can tell me?
>> Yes.
>> But, you know, we learn we learn all
this stuff and we try to we try to make
it as seem we try to make it as easy as
possible for people. But I think once
they understand what's going on and how
to do it, uh, people feed back
information to us and tell us new
information. Then we do it to the mice
and we see how the mice respond. And
often times it's a feed forward feedback
and we learn so much.
>> Yeah. Yes. And you have a podcast
channel yourself, right, on talking
about cancer.
>> Yeah. It's I have I I we're doing
Instagrams and doing this kind of stuff.
U Okay.
>> We're trying to get the word out. Uh,
and we like questions because a lot of
people have questions like I did this
and it didn't work and and I have
physicians that help me where we have
physicians that understand the concepts.
So, they always help people um walk
through the process. Uh, I can't tell
people as I said I I don't have a
license to practice medicine. Uh, I I
and I don't, you know, tell a person
who's got, you know, five bypasses, go
out and run a marathon uh to get
healthy. We don't do stuff like that. I
mean everything has to be staged. You
know everybody uh we do a comprehensive
my colleagues do a comprehensive blood
work on people knowing how far out of
homeostasis they are because you can for
a lot of information can come from the
blood. uh you can see exactly if you're
in the range of health from all the
different constellation of markers and
then once we know that then we slowly
move the body into a better and
healthier state more agile and then we
only introduce drugs and procedures as
necessary uh and we can non non-invasive
uh imaging and other procedures to
assess whether or not the tumors are
responding. You don't have to stick them
and get tissue and create inflammation
may possibly spreading cancer around the
body. Um you you have no evidence of
what does no evidence of disease mean?
You don't see any tumor anymore? Uh
using using PET scan, CAT scan or
whatever kind of scans you want to use.
And the basic thing we always say, how
do you feel? How do you feel? People ask
that you know I have stage four cancer.
How do you feel? I feel great. How do
you know you have stage four? I know the
guy told me. He says, where's the
evidence? He says, "Well, they can't
find any evidence anymore." So, they
said I was terminal. And the next thing
you know, he's he's like Pablo Kelly.
Oh, you got you're terminal, Pablo.
Well, you know, we're all terminal to
some extent. But Pablo's still around
for years and years and years. I thought
I was terri
um terminal cancer guy getting married
and have three children. And if it w and
if it wasn't for the cerebral hemorrhage
that he had, he probably would have
still been alive. So, but he's he was
terminal. He was considered terminal.
What does that mean? is that what is
that kind of a it's an impending doom
that ne does not necessarily have to
happen if you do metabolic therapy. So
>> and I don't know
maybe maybe they will eventually die of
of that but I but if you're I know that
if you live to be if you're diagnosed
with cancer at 35 or 40 and you die from
old age at 95 from a heart attack you
obviously were cured of your cancer
because you didn't die from it. So, how
would you know any other way?
>> Yeah, that's a good point.
>> The it's called it's called uh quality
of life. How long can you live with a
higher quality of life? Um you may have
to give up a few things that you
previously thought were great, but uh we
can manage these diseases once we know
what to do and how to do it.
>> Yes. Yes. And you mentioned you like
getting questions. You have your
Instagram. How do people reach you?
Um, well, they could email me. Uh, I try
to give them information. I ask for a
small donation to Travis, but a lot of
the people that contact me are of of of
they don't they're not people of means.
Let's put it that way. Um, and you know,
whatever they feel they could give,
sometimes they don't give anything. I
always say if you want to help us um
don't don't uh if you live if you find
your life getting better and you're
feeling better and your tumors are
shrinking then you might want to support
it. Why why give some money to somebody
if you if it's not going to help you.
>> Nice.
>> I'm not I'm not in the business to make
money. We're we're in the business to
see how long we can keep terminal cancer
people alive. You know, I I like I like
to I like to target the the term
terminal. Uh I I want to make sure that
that becomes extend extended term. What
does extended terminal mean? You mean
that someday? Yeah, we're all going to
die someday, but uh let's not accelerate
the eventuality. Let's post let's uh
extend it as long as we can. So, I like
to see people that were told they were
going to die in six months to a year and
they're out five years and they're doing
fine. Uh, isn't that enough reward for
somebody? I got a job here. I don't need
to make a billion dollars.
>> I just need to know that it's working.
>> Yes. Yes. You seem very committed to
your purpose and getting this message
out and helping people extend their
quality of life and push that date out
if they're diagnosed as terminal. Any
other takeaways that you would want our
listeners to have as this as we're
wrapping up? You know, I I think that I
mean, our mission is very clear. Uh we
have an endgame on this whole thing, and
that's to see metabolic therapy become
part of the standard of care. Uh because
it's going to help so many more people.
And that's a challenge. I mean, you're
up against a wall of resistance. Uh not
that they say your science is wrong, uh
but in fact, they rarely, if ever,
criticize the science. It's always
something other than, oh, it hasn't been
proven. Oh, you didn't do a clinical
trial. Oh, this is a fluke. That's how
many damn flukes do you want to see
before you make up the in fact they'll
never change. They have to be told don't
do that anymore. Do this and then
they'll do it. So yeah, it's a
challenge, but it's it's a it's an
interesting one because it works and
we're seeing I even I'm shocked
sometimes when I see these poor people
uh that I thought were dead. You know,
believe me, oh, I got stage four breast
cancer. It's in my brain and bones and
you know, I want to try metabolic
therapy. I don't hear from them. And
then all of a sudden, two, three years
later, I get an email. Oh, I'm doing
fine. I I I the doctors are always
miffed. They didn't understand what
happened. I said, I know exactly.
>> Love it.
>> So, we I'm always shocked. So, I turn it
over to my my students because they're
really getting excited uh about this
because the cancer is now striking
younger and younger people and it used
to be only a disease of older folks.
Now, it's coming. I can't tell you how
many young young people. So clearly it's
our environment that's putting our
people at risk and we we can put it we
can put a stop to that real quick uh
because we know what's going on and and
how to manage it. So the young people
need to get involved uh and start waking
up to the understanding of their biology
and then we'll be able to reduce this
significantly from what we're
experiencing today. Managing chronic
disease uh very effectively using
metabolic therapy uh will be the way to
go.
Absolutely. Yes. Well, Dr. Safe, thank
you so much for sharing your wisdom,
your passion today. For our listeners,
thank you for being with us. Please
like, subscribe, share this with someone
who may benefit. Also, just a
disclaimer, as Dr. Seaff Freed
mentioned, uh this podcast is for
information only and should not be
viewed as medical advice. Uh hope
today's discussion inspires you to live
well, take better care of yourselves and
thank you for tuning